---
layout: post
title:  "The Physics Behind Josh Beckett's No-Hitter"
date:   2014-05-26 20:56
categories: Sports
tags: beckett, no-hitter, physics, pitchf/x, wordpress
---

[Josh
Beckett](http://mlb.mlb.com/team/player.jsp?player_id=277417#gameType='R'&sectionType=career&statType=2&season=2014&level='ALL') of
the Los Angeles Dodgers tossed the first no-hitter of the 2014 MLB
season on Sunday. Over 9 innings of work, the 6'5", 230 lb. righthander
threw 128 pitches, striking out 6 Phillies' batters and facing 30
batters in all, just 3 over the minimum.

[Boxscore](http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2014_05_25_lanmlb_phimlb_1&mode=box&c_id=la) statistics can
only tell us so much about Beckett's gem. Here are some graphics that
can help us in analyzing the underpinnings of Beckett's success on
Sunday:

[![speed](http://jskaza.files.wordpress.com/2014/05/speed.png?w=625)](http://jskaza.files.wordpress.com/2014/05/speed.png)

 

 

 

 

[![horiz
movement](http://jskaza.files.wordpress.com/2014/05/horiz-movement.png?w=625)](http://jskaza.files.wordpress.com/2014/05/horiz-movement.png)

 

 

 

 

[![vert pitch
location](http://jskaza.files.wordpress.com/2014/05/vert-pitch-location.png?w=625)](http://jskaza.files.wordpress.com/2014/05/vert-pitch-location.png)

All of the data used in producing these graphics were retrieved from the
excellent baseball research
resource, [http://www.brooksbaseball.net](http://www.brooksbaseball.net/).
The site lists Beckett as having featured a fourseam fastball, sinker,
changeup, curveball, cutter, and splitter at at least one point or
another throughout the 2014 campaign (note, however, that Beckett did
not throw his splitter during his no-hitter).

**Interpreting the Graphs**

During the no-hitter, Beckett's average velocity on each of his pitches
was essentially the same as it has been all season. He garnered more
horizontal movement on each of his pitches though, which leads me to
believe that both his "stuff" and command were sharper than normal. It
is neat that analyzing this type of data can allow one to quantify
abstract ideas such as the effectiveness of a pitcher's "stuff" and the
command which he holds over his pitches. Perhaps the most telltale sign
that Beckett was at the top if his game is that he was keeping his
pitches down in the zone, which is illustrated in the third plot. Notice
that the average location of each of Beckett's pitches (except for the
cutter, which he threw only 8 times on Sunday) was noticeably lower than
it has been all season.

**Further Reading**

I have only scratched the surface on what can be done with this sort of
[PITCHf/x](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PITCHf/x) data. [Dr. Alan
Nathan](http://baseball.physics.illinois.edu/) has developed volumes of
neat research on the physics of baseball.
[FanGraphs](http://www.fangraphs.com/) has a lot of statistics and
graphics that are developed using PITCHf/x data. Finally, as I mentioned
above, [BrooksBaseball](http://www.brooksbaseball.net/) is also a
tremendous resource.

 
