---
layout: post
title: The Logic of Sherlock Holmes
date: 2014-05-22 22:19
category: Science
tags: bayes, data, logic, sherlock, wordpress
---

*The Reminiscenses of Jon*

Over the past few years, I’ve become a Sherlockian so to speak, though
not in the traditional sense. I’ve watched the [Robert Downey, Jr.
films](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sherlock_Holmes_(2009_film)) and
both Series 1 and 2 of BBC’s
*[Sherlock](http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b018ttws) *(hopefully Series
3 will be up on Netflix relatively soon!). I have also become an avid
viewer of CBS’s
*[Elementary](http://www.cbs.com/shows/elementary/) *adaptation. Until
very recently, however, my interest in Holmes’ and Watson’s adventures
had nothing to do with [Sir Arthur Conan
Doyle’s](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arthur_Conan_Doyle) novels and
short stories. That I neglected to read about the original Holmes is
likely a mistake on my part, but one that I am attempting to quickly
correct.

<!--\[caption id="attachment\_24" align="aligncenter"
width="300"\]![tumblr\_mcyew5hyHm1r6mt8go1\_500](http://jskaza.files.wordpress.com/2014/05/tumblr_mcyew5hyhm1r6mt8go1_500.png?w=300)
Three modern day Sherlocks. From left to right: Jonny Lee Miller, Robert
Downey, Jr., and Benedict Cumberbatch.\[/caption\]-->

Seeing that my spring semester just concluded, I’ve found myself with a
good deal of free time—free time perfectly suited for some pleasure
reading. Now, when I do have time to read for pleasure—which certainly
does not occur frequently during school semesters—I almost always choose
to read nonfiction (in my mind, I’d rather learn something about a topic
of interest to me than read something that is made up (this is a topic
for another day)). This time, however, I decided to give Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle a chance and, so far, am very happy I did.

I’ve read [*A Study in
Scarlet*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Study_in_Scarlet), [*The Sign
of Four*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Sign_of_the_Four), and a
couple of short stories so far. I think another reason why I hesitated
to dive into the old readings is, well, because they are old. For
reference, *A Study* *in Scarlet* was published in 1887 and *The Sign of
Four* in 1890. I’ve never particularly enjoyed reading books published
prior to the 20<sup>th</sup> century because of the antiquated language and
style, but, again, *Holmes* has not disappointed, which prompted me to
write this post.

Back to the stories themselves though.  What has impressed me about the
literary Sherlock is the logic that he uses to make his deductions. On a
screen, it is easy to convey how Holmes deduces something about a
person. I thought it would be difficult to replicate this precise
process through writing, but Sir Arthur Conan Doyle does exactly this in
very succinct fashion. While there are more involved deductions in the
novels, take this brief passage, from *The Sign of Four*, for example,

> Observation tells me that you have a little reddish mold adhering to
> your instep. Just opposite the Wigmore Street Office they have taken
> up the pavement and thrown up some earth, which lies in such a way
> that it is difficult to avoid treading in it entering. The earth is of
> this particular reddish tint which is found, as far as I know, nowhere
> else in the neighborhood. So much is observation. The rest is
> deduction.

Now it is possible for one to argue that there are flaws in Holmes’
logic every so often, but I think that much of the logic is rather sound
for the purpose of storytelling.

What I really wanted to get into with regard to the *Holmes* books,
however, is some of the logic which literary Sherlock employs to crack
cases and its robustness in real-world applications. Namely, in *A Study
in Scarlet*, I read, “It is a capital mistake to theorize before you
have all the evidence.  It biases the judgment.” While in *The Sign of
Four*, I encountered the famous line, “when you have eliminated the
impossible, whatever remains, *however improbable*, must be the truth.”
Let me address both in turn.

***“It is a capital mistake to theorize before you have all the
evidence. It biases the judgment.”***

I entirely agree that evidence should always come before theory, else we
run into the issue of manipulating evidence to suit a theory. Though I
question, do we need *all* evidence in order to craft a strong theory? I
tend to think not. [Bayesian
inference](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayesian_inference) techniques
rely on using new information to update probabilities and, ultimately,
theories. Take the sunrise for instance. I am pretty darned sure that
the sun will rise tomorrow. But am I certain? The answer is no. Each day
that I see it rise I get more evidence that it rises every day, but I
will never be 100% sure. Imagine living eons ago and witnessing the
sunrise for the first time. Would you think it would follow the same
pattern day-in and day-out? If in that position I know I wouldn't bet on
that with 100% certainty. But each day I witnessed the sun rise, I would
up the probability of it following the pattern.

**Verdict: While it is ideal to have all of the data before making a
decision or crafting a theory (whatever the discipline may be), this is
rarely feasible. Sherlock Holmes himself never has access to all of the
data related to a case. I think that it is best to craft a theory once
an ample amount of evidence is obtained and to constantly update that
theory when new evidence becomes available. Also, I believe that it is
important to be transparent and to let your audience know of the
limitations of your theory (limited data, missing data, etc.) so that
they may judge the validity and merit of your theory on their own).**

***“when you have eliminated the impossible, whatever remains, however
improbable, must be the truth.”***

I think that this logic is intuitively appealing.  I think that, similar
to the other quote which I discussed above, it fundamentally speaks to
the dangers of biased judgment. I think one ought to delve into a
problem with a hypothesis about what is true, but should be prepared for
that hypothesis to fail. If too attached to a hypothesis, one runs the
risk of manipulating the data/evidence to fit that hypothesis.

**Verdict: I'd take Sherlock's advice. If the data proves a hypothesis
wrong in favor of a seemingly improbable result, admit that the data
proved you wrong. Be open. Now, I certainly find it acceptable to dig
deeper and try to reveal *why* your hypothesis was wrong. This leads to
even more knowledge creation and understanding. Replication,
[meta-analyses](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meta-analysis), and
peer-reviews are all valuable in this regard.**

While S*herlock Holmes* is fun and entertaining, I think that practical
lessons can be drawn from his adventures. I always like to get something
that I can apply in the real-world out of a book or movie, and from
*Sherlock Holmes*, I take away lessons in logic.
